Expertise, opacity, and trust in AI systems

Éloïse Boisseau

1 Introduction

The conjoined issues of the trust placed in experts and the deference shown by non-specialists toward them are well-established topics in social epistemology (Hardwig, 1985, 1991; Lackey, 2018; Goldman, 2001; Rolin, 2002; Whyte & Crease, 2010). An overview of some of the major questions surrounding expertise further reveals the extent to which this notion of deference hinges on more general relationships of ‘epistemic dependence’, to use John Hardwig’s (1985) expression. Our ability to gain knowledge, presented as an irreducibly social enterprise, is arguably one in which it is then rational for a layperson to rely on the testimony of the expert (Hardwig, 1985)1. This rational reliance on the expert to gain knowledge is nevertheless associated with a certain sort of (more or less) voluntary blindness from the one seeking knowledge. As Hardwig (1991, p. 693) pointed out, trust is in essence ‘partially blind’ (emphasis added). Gran ting trust to gain knowledge or make an informed decision implies, at least temporarily and figuratively, to shut one’s eyes and rely on some thing other than one’s own cognitive, perceptive or intellectual capacities.

These matters about trust, dependence and expertise in the context of knowledge acquisition, traditional as they are, are nowadays being revisited as our epistemic world is being redefined by the arrival of what might seem to be new epistemic agents: artificial systems apparently endowed with entirely new cognitive-like capabilities. Used in an ever-increasing number of contexts and based on deep (or multilayer) artificial neural net works (DNNs), the programs we are ref erring to are so-called ‘learning’ programs, based on the method known as ‘deep learning’. These programs are proving to be extremely versatile: depending on the data they are ‘trained’ on, they can carry out tasks (hitherto exclusively reserved to human experts) with a certain degree of autonomy and in a generally highly satisfactory manner. A network trained to detect patterns within an initial data set can thus be mobilised to discover trends within this corpus and be able, when subsequently confronted with a novel item, to make predictions, take decisions, propose diagnoses, categorise, etc., on its basis. Systems involving deep learning are widely used (to mention only some of the cases most frequently dis cussed in the literature) in the context of medical diagnosis and imaging (Lee et al., 2017; Grote & Berens, 2020; Bjerring & Busch, 2020), pol icing – within what is sometimes referred to as ‘predictive pol icing’ – (Asaro, 2019; Walsh, 2022), banking, finance and insurance (Narang et al., 2024; Pingili, 2024).

The observation is therefore that a growing number of our hitherto highly specialised tasks are now falling under the yoke of an epistemic dependence not only on human experts, but also on these new systems the efficiency and precision of which are often equivalent to, or greater than, that of human experts (Esteva et al., 2017; Rajpurkar et al., 2017). It is also widely suggested that a new stage has in fact been reached as far as epistemic dependence is concerned, due to the possession by these programs of an unprecedented characteristic for artificial systems: a kind of ‘opacity’ (Burrell, 2016; Creel, 2020; Ross, 2022; Zerilli, 2022; Duede, 2022). In an influential paper, Jenna Burrell (2016, pp. 1–2) distinguishes three main forms of opacity for nonexperts, with regard to the functioning of machine learning-based AI systems. The first one arises as a result of industrial secrecy (‘opacity as intentional corporate or institutional self-protection and concealment’). The second one is presented as a form of ‘technical illiteracy’ or ‘technical opacity’ – to use two labels that have been given to it in the literature, respectively by Grote and Berens (2020) and Kaminski (2018). This form of opacity, Burrell explains, ‘stem[s] from the current state of affairs where writing (and reading) code is a specialist skill’. Finally the third form of opacity Burrell identifies is the unintelligibility to humans of the mathematical processes involved in an algorithm. This, she writes, ‘stems from the mismatch between mathematical optimization in high dimensionality characteristic of machine learning and the demands of human-scale reasoning and styles of semantic interpretation’. Burrell’s three forms of opacity overlap to a certain extent with four varieties which we shall consider below. Opaque systems are furthermore frequently referred to in the literature as epistemic ‘black boxes’ (London, 2019; Creel, 2020), insofar as it is virtually impossible to verify or obtain any kind of explanation or justification concerning the production of a particular output. Black box systems, in other words (those of Frank Pasquale, 2015, p. 3), are systems ‘whose workings are mysterious’. The use of such ‘opaque’ systems naturally poses a number of ethical problems, including embarrassing cases of ‘responsibility gaps’ (Coeckelbergh, 2020; Da Silva, 2024) and algorithmic biases (Walsh, 2022; Walker et al., 2023) – the latter being liable to lead the considered technology to be described as ‘oppressive’ (Huebner & Liao, 2021). Given that these risks are real and relatively well identified, a pressing question then arises as to what precise account or expression should the trust placed in such systems be given.

A somewhat recurrent hypothesis in the literature – sometimes stated explicitly, other times implicitly or underlyingly – is that the trust placed in these opaque systems should be modelled on the type of trust we ordinarily place in human experts. The rationale would be that the epistemic dependence to which we are subject in relation to deep learning-based systems would itself be similar or analogous to that which we experience in relatively ordinary situations of lay deference to the expert (Zerilli et al. 2019, London, 2019). The reason for this comparison would lie in the existence of a similar form of opacity, manifest in both cases. One can read, for example, that ‘essentially, the relationship between practitioner and AI system is epistemic ally analogous to the relationship between practitioner and expert’ (Bjerring & Bush, 2020, p. 6), or that ‘the features that make expert opinion trustworthy, and our trust in those individuals’ decisions both epistemic ally and ethically responsible—can be realized in AI as well’ (Ross, 2022, p. 8). According to these views, the AI system would then be considered a bona fide new expert, no longer human but artificial in nature (Grote & Berens, 2020). The output produced by the program would then, in these contexts, be regarded as an epistemic judgement in its own right, and the issue of peer disagreement would arise in an equivalent manner in cases where the judgements of two human experts differ and in cases where the output of a program and the judgement of a human expert differ (Grote & Berens, 2020).

In what follows, I shall argue that there are few merits but many limits to this comparison between the human expert and the artificial system. The second section of the paper will offer a brief reflection on the trust ordinarily placed in epistemic instruments and the upheaval caused in this respect by current AI systems. The third section of the paper will set out some arguments in favour of conceptualising our trust in artificial systems on the model of our trust in human experts, as they are sometimes found in the literature. We shall see that this conceptualisation is based on the much dis cussed but ambiguous notion of opacity (which in fact crystallises many debates surrounding artificial decision-making systems). An examination of such arguments will furthermore reveal the underlying conception of expertise on which the conceptualisation stands, which is veritistic through and through. The fourth section of the paper will show the limits of this conception of expertise, and will argue against conceptualising trust in artificial systems on the model of trust in human experts. I will temper the extent to which human expertise is opaque, and suggest a number of criteria for being deemed ‘expert’ on a subject matter – which, as we shall see, AI systems logically cannot satisfy. I will conclude by suggesting that AI systems cannot be genuine ‘experts’ and thus cannot literally be ‘epistemic peers’ with which human experts might agree or disagree. Therefore, modelling the trust we place in AI systems on the trust we place in human experts is a misguided (and potentially epistemic ally dangerous) attitude. Indeed it is only once we recognise that these systems are at best instruments (and not epistemic collaborators or superiors) that we can begin to reflect fruitfully on the appropriate epistemic behaviours to adopt regarding them.

2 Trust in artificial systems

2.1 Trust and reliance

Let us first make a few distinctions regarding this notion of trust visàvis artificial systems. For a start and from a general perspective, one crucial feature of trusting another agent is often presented as a form of uncertainty coupled to a positive expectation towards the trusted agent (Danks, 2019). Uncertainty on the one hand, because trusting implies not knowing for sure that the trusted agent will as a matter of fact be trustworthy. And a positive expectation on the other hand, as trusting another agent suggests that one does think that said agent is, as a matter of fact, reliable or trustworthy. These two characteristics (uncertainty and positive expectation) are also tied to a form of vulnerability on the part of the agent who takes the step of placing their trust in another. We can read, e.g. in Danks (2019, p. 521), that ‘at a high level, we often understand trust as a relation in which the trustor makes oneself vulnerable based on positive expectations about the behavior or intentions of the trustee’ (see also Alvarado, 2022).

Turning now more specifically to trust in an artificial system (an artefact), let us point out the following: it is traditional to distinguish at least between two aspects of trust in artificial systems: the most ‘traditional’ aspect (since it initially concerns machines in the traditional sense of the term – i.e. artefacts with moving parts) is that of ‘reliance’ (Coeckelbergh, 2012). Recently, a more debatable aspect to come forth in the context of trust in artefacts is that of the ‘trustworthiness’ of a given artificial system. With regard to the first aspect, trust as a form of reliance reflects the idea that one can count on a specific artefact (one can rely on it) to function properly. This aspect partly (but not entirely) coincides with what Ramón Alvarado (2022, p. 4) considers to be a ‘technical approach to trust in AI’, and to what Mark Ryan (2020) coins a ‘rational account’ of trust (see also Nickel, 2013). In other words, by using a specific artefact, one expects it to behave or function in a certain way (namely in the way that was intended at the time of its design) and thus to enable one to do certain things (those for which it was precisely designed).

Discussions about epistemic artefacts often take the time to distinguish more finely between several types of justification for the trust (as reliance) placed in these instruments. Following the categorisation pro posed by Rom Harré (2010) – recently revisited by Eamon Duede (2022) – we can distinguish between physically mediated instruments and theoretically mediated instruments (Duede, 2022) – two types of epistemic instruments with two types of justifications for the trust placed in them. The former, namely physically mediated instruments, have a causal relationship with the world they enable us to study (a paradigmatic example would be the telescope). The confidence that one is justified in placing in them depends in part on the prior establishment of ‘the limits and conditions under which the instruments function with consistency’, and on the subsequent assurance that they are indeed used within these limits and under the right conditions (Duede, 2022, p. 9). The latter, i.e. theoretically mediated instruments – which are of particular interest to us here – entertain a relationship that is no longer causal but purely conceptual with the world they enable us to study (the paradigmatic example being the model or simulation). The confidence one is justified in placing in them rests this time on ‘knowledge of the principles that the procedure operationalizes’, as well as on knowledge of the conditions ‘under which these principles apply’ (ibid. p. 10)6.

In relation to artefacts or machines, the positive expectation of the user therefore reflects a form of epistemic deference towards the agents who created the artefacts: someone using a GPS device to find their way around an unfamiliar city does not need to know how the device works in order to rely on it. All they need to do is accept that it has been properly configured by individuals who, for their part, understand the ‘principles that the procedure operationalizes’ (to use Duede’s wording) – i.e. the principles that govern it. The trust that users place in their GPS (their reliance on its proper functioning) is then understood as what Mark Coeckelbergh (2012, p. 55) ultimately describes as a merely predictive trust. This trust is based on the prima facie trust that users place in the people (the experts) who created the system. Trust in artefacts is thus, as Coeckelbergh writes (p. 54), a form of ‘indirect trust in the humans related to the technology’.

2.2 Trust and trustworthiness

As regards the second aspect of trust – i.e. trust as a recognition of the trustworthiness of another agent – the matter is to some extent analogous to that of mere reliance, but it is also frequently considered to be a much more demanding characteristic (and one that it is not obvious that a machine can possess). A commonplace observation regarding trustworthiness is, of course, that there may be a discrepancy between an agent’s decision to trust another and the latter’s actual trustworthiness. In other words, it is conceivable (and in fact rather common) for one to trust someone who is not actually trustworthy, and conversely not to trust a person who is, as a matter of fact, trustworthy. Trustworthiness is considered to be much more meaningful than mere reliability, and being trustworthy would require the recipient of trust to possess particular moral characteristics. Trust is therefore sometimes referred to as a type of ‘affective attitude’ (Jones, 1996; see also Baier, 1994) insofar as the trustee would be motivated by a form of goodwill towards the trustor: they would not want to disappoint or let them down. On the other hand, the trustor – as Karen Jones explains in her well-known paper (1996, p. 4) – would demonstrate ‘an attitude of optimism about [the trustee’s] goodwill and […] have the confident expectation that, when the need arises, the one trusted will be directly and favorably moved by the thought that [one is] counting on her’. Another widely echoed approach to trusting someone is that of trust as a normative attitude (see particularly Baier, 1986). As Richard Holton (1994, p. 67) explains it, the normative account of trust implies that ‘[w]hen you trust someone to do some thing, you rely on them to do it, and you regard that reliance in a certain way: you have a readiness to feel betrayal should it be disappointed, and gratitude should it be upheld’. Thus, according to these accounts of trust as an affective or normative attitude, it is clear that an artificial system is not the kind of thing that could be the recipient of trust in this sense. In other words, such a system could not logically be trustworthy, as ‘trustworthiness can only be a property of “full moral agents”’ (Ryan, 2020, p. 10). On this point Ryan agrees with Jones (1996, p. 14), who remarks that …

Trusting is not an attitude that we can adopt toward machinery. I can rely on my computer not to destroy important documents or on my old car to get me from A to B, but my old car is reliable rather than trustworthy. One can only trust things that have wills (…)

Several authors now consider that trust in the latest AI systems (based on deep learning) – although it can no longer be thought of solely in terms of reliance and needs to be reconceptualised – should not be approached in the same way as one approaches interpersonal trust, i.e. trust between human agents (Ryan, 2020; Alvarado, 2022). Here, I shall be in broad agreement with this type of views, which can be subsumed under the label – coined by Ori Freiman (2022, p. 4) – of ‘anthropocentric views of trust’. In Freiman’s words, this label designates (…) several different approaches to trust, [which] all commonly share two features: (a) not ascribing human agency to technologies; and (b) ref erring to humans behind the technologies in matters regarding trust and responsibility. (Freiman, ibid.)

To outline this general point, I shall take as a case study a family of positions in the literature on trust in AI systems that, on the contrary, specifically rely on attributing a form of expertise to AI systems by comparing certain characteristics of these systems with certain supposedly analogous characteristics of human experts.

3 Blind trust and expertise

3.1 Let us meet in the dark

We have already noted that there is a constitutive form of (partial) blindness in trust. However, a significant subset of the philosophical and epistemological literature on AI systems takes up this observation to put forward the following hypothesis: the epistemic position we find ourselves in (as nonspecialists in a domain) when it comes to assessing the correctness and reliability of the judgements of a human expert would actually be no more advantageous than the position we find ourselves in when it comes to assessing the correctness and reliability of the judgements of an AI system (Zerilli et al. 2019; London, 2019). The reason often put forward lies in the existence of a supposed analogous opacity, manifest in both cases. Indeed, when one places trust in a human expert, this trust is very rarely based on a form of direct verification of the correctness or validity of the epistemic operations carried out by the expert in question. There is usually no attempt on the part of the non specialist to verify the experts’ assertions for themselves. On the contrary, they are arguably rationally justified in defer ring to the experts’ decisions without having access to the reasoning behind them. There is thus a form of blindness and obscurity in the trust placed in human experts. It is precisely this supposed similarity in blindness that has led some authors, whose views I wish to challenge here, to hypothesise that we are in fact in quite similar situations when we interact with human experts and AI systems. Let us take a look at a few concrete examples of this rhetoric.

Amber Ross (2022), in a recent paper, goes in this direction and advocates the fertility of such a conceptualisation of our relationship with AI systems by analogy with the relationship we ordinarily have with human experts. She writes that …

our relation to some opaque AI technology may be sufficiently similar to the ordinary layperson’s relation to the specialized expert such that analyzing the successful expert/layperson epistemic relation may provide us with a blueprint for how to best utilize opaque AI, both practically and ethically. (Ross, 2022, p. 2)

The opacity of AI systems is therefore no longer seen solely as an epistemic impediment to be overcome, but also as part of the solution to this very impediment. Opacity would constitute an ordinary characteristic of expertise. And it is on this expertise that all epistemic confidence – both direct and indirect – is actually conditioned.

This is not an isolated case. There are several presentations of this conceptualisation of human reasoning and decision-making processes (which here concern both experts and nonexperts) based on the blackbox model.

Ross (2022, p. 2) notes that …

For the vast majority of society, the evidence and reasoning processes of any

expert in a specialized field is opaque, a genuine ‘black box’.

Melanie Mitchell (2019, p. 127) observes that …

Humans can’t always explain their thought processes either, and you generally can’t look “under the hood” into other people’s brains (or into their “gut feelings”) to figure out how they came to any particular decision.

Herman Cappelen and Josh Dever (2021, p. 12), meanwhile, note that even in cases where we do look ‘under the hood’ …

what we find is not intelligible to us. It’s a black box. It will operate in ways that

are too complex for us to understand.

Finally, John Zerilli et al. (2019, p. 666) suggest that explaining human actions is all the more tricky because the agents themselves are sometimes unaware of their true motivations or what may have played a role in their reasoning. They write that …

A large part of human-level opacity stems from the fact that human agents are also frequently mistaken about their real (internal) motivations and processing logic, a fact that is often obscured by the ability of human decision makers to invent post hoc rationalizations.

This blackbox rhetoric, as it is used by the authors mentioned above, seems to invite us to distinguish several varieties of opacity that are supposedly immanent to the relationship of trust between the layperson and the expert – an opacity generally presented, as we have just seen, as a place of reunion for the human expert and the AI system on which we rely to make decisions or acquire knowledge. Here, I propose to single out four varieties of opacity.

(1) Contingent relational opacity for the layperson.
The first variety of opacity, mentioned by Ross, is characteristic of a layperson’s unfamiliarity with a particular field of expertise. ‘[T]he vast majority of society’, so she writes, is indeed unfamiliar with the methods, jargon, past discoveries, current debates – in a word, with every thing that shapes the common culture specific to a field of specialisation. Of course, there is nothing definitive or irremediable about this opacity: the layperson could train themselves in the discipline in question, or have the reasoning followed by the expert explained in detail, and thus perhaps manage to understand and grasp what is at stake.

Ordinarily, however, we might agree with Ross that an expert’s judgements are to some extent ‘opaque’ to the non specialist – and that this opacity stems from the latter’s unfamiliarity with the field of expertise in question. Let us call this first variety of opacity a contingent relational opacity for the layperson.

(3) Relational opacity of the expert.
A second variety of opacity, visible in Mitchell’s comment quoted above, relates not just to the difficulty of the non specialist in apprehending and understanding the reasoning of an expert, but also points to the fact that it is sometimes very difficult (if not downright impossible) for an expert to explain the reasoning they have followed to reach their conclusion. Part of the reason for this impossibility would be that the expert has not necessarily followed a particular reasoning, step by step, to reach their conclusion (but instead had a hunch, exhibited a savoir-faire, conjured an intuition, etc.).

It is commonplace in the literature on the opacity of expert decisions to be reminded that there is a whole range of fields of expertise in which explicit ‘principles’ are simply ‘either elusive or unwelcome’ (Ground, 2024, p. 137). This highlights the fact that the knowledge or knowhow of many experts is not always formalisable or even simply formula table, and that the decisions taken might be based on a form of intuition rather than on explicit reasoning. To take one example, Evan Thompson et al. (2024, p. 169) rightly point out that expert Go players ‘use their finely honed pattern recognition skills, which they cannot verbalize or formulate in terms of explicit concepts and rules’. Other examples generally considered are those of artistic and medical expertise. With regard to the latter, Alex London (2019, p. 17) stresses the extent to which ‘atheoretical, associationist, and opaque decisions are more common in medicine than critics realize’. In this variety of opacity, however, there is still always a link to a form of habituation, education and training at play in the expert’s verdict, conclusion or judgement (the judgement is not completely oracular in this respect). I will call this second variety of opacity a relational opacity of the expert.

(5) Intrinsic opacity of cognitive-like systems for anyone.
A third variety of opacity, to which Cappelen and Dever refer, has more to do with the apparent (prima facie) unintelligibility of human brain operations and processes. In the context we are dealing with here, the point is that, despite the complexity and apparent unintelligibility of brain processes, humans are nonetheless capable of reasoning and making decisions that are, for their part, perfectly understandable. Since DNNs are designed on the model of cerebral neural net works, it is assumed (by parity of reasoning) that systems with this architecture could then have similar capabilities. The difficult ‘reading’ or ‘interpretation’ of opaque neural processes is thus presented as not being the end of the story, insofar as we have nevertheless managed to find ‘factors other than neurocomputational implementation in answering that “why” question’ (Cappelen & Dever, 2021 p. 19) about the explanation of our actions and decisions. The underlying point is, of course, that it might be possible to do the same for the outputs of AI systems. I will call this opacity an intrinsic opacity of cognitive-like systems for anyone since it has nothing to do with the expert or the layperson (i.e., since it is not the result of an asymmetry between the expert and the layperson).

(7) Opacity of unconscious biases.
The fourth variety of opacity that I want to consider here is quite singular insofar as it does not exclusively concern individuals who defer to a decision-making epistemic agent (lay people or nonexperts, in other words). Rather, it affects the decision-making agents themselves. This form of opacity is reflected in the form of ‘cognitive processes underlying human choices’, which thus differ from the previously mentioned opacity of judgement linked to the non explicit nature of the method followed by an expert (the relational opacity of the expert), and rather designates the presence in decision-making of what are often described as ‘implicit biases’ or ‘unconscious biases’ (Greenwald & Banaji, 1995)11.

In what way is there an analogy here with AI systems? The opacity linked to the unconscious biases of epistemic agents (in general) is sometimes presented as analogous to the opacity of the decisions of AI systems insofar as the latter have to deal with the famous problem of biases that are no longer cognitive or epistemic but algorithmic. This problem – also presented under the label of ‘algorithmic fairness’ – refers to the sometimes discriminatory nature of certain algorithms (Hajian et al., 2016; Hass, 2024). There would therefore be a form of opacity here, insofar as in both cases the reasons put forward (for establishing a conclusion, a verdict, a categorisation, etc.) could themselves be unclear or tainted by underground motives or causes. For our purposes, this variety of opacity pushes the comparison between opaque artificial systems and human epistemic agents even further.

At the very least, these rather different varieties show us that when the notion of ‘black box’ is mobilised, it can be used to aim at quite different targets. There is a certain kind of opacity in the very concept of opacity. Despite this disparity in the varieties of opacity, one conclusion seems to emerge (from these different fronts): that opacity – as a characteristic common to AI systems and human experts – can certainly be apprehended in a uniform manner when trust is granted to humans and when trust is granted to AI systems. Whether the opacity is contingent or not, whether it is the effect of bias or not, whether it is an effect of perspective or not, whether it is the echo of our ignorance or not, it does seem to be systematically assimilable in the case of the human expert and in the case of the expert software. At least, this is what the trend that we have identified here – in the otherwise rather gigantic literature on AI opacity – suggests. The two cases are then considered to be sufficiently similar so that equivalent ‘stand ards’ should apply to both types of ‘decision systems’. Consequently, the problem now appears to be to determine how the question of the opacity of human experts’ decisions is usually dealt with and resolved, and then to apply a similar or equivalent recipe to solve that of the opacity of artificial decision-making systems.

3.2 Expertise, trust and credibility

A dimension of expertise and trust placed in human experts is worth mentioning: that it is deeply social or even institutional in nature. It is in fact relatively trivial to note that we – as lay people – tend to be satisfied with the expert’s competence solely on the basis of a form of social recognition of the expert as such (Agnew et al., 1997; Collins & Evans, 2007; Goldman, 2018; Ross, 2022). The layperson’s trust in the expert is thus largely based on the existence of a certain number of epistemic institutions that are specifically endowed with the role of certification or authentication of expertise. These institutions may or may not affix their seal of approval to the trust that we, as lay people, are justified in placing in supposed experts. This ‘reputational’ (Goldman, 2018) or ‘relational’ (Collins & Evans, 2007) conception of expertise also implies that the layperson, in order to defer to an expert, must first place their trust in other experts: the authenticating ones (Ross, 2022).

How is this first remark about the role of epistemic institutions in the recognition of expertise relevant to the topic at hand? It is relevant because it is sometimes presented as a tempting solution to partially resolve the issue of trust in AI systems in relation to their blackbox nature. The idea would be to equip ourselves with an institutional apparatus analogous to the one that is put in place in the context of human expertise, which could take charge of assessing the reliability of an artificial system – and which could also play the role of moral guarantee for our deference towards the decisions taken by a machine. Such ‘credentialing processes’ for AI are mentioned by Ross (2022, p. 9) as a way of providing a reason for nonspecialists to defer to decisions made by machines. She writes that …

if we are interested in developing an approval process that could certify certain opaque AI technology and approve its use in particular contexts while all owing the technology to remain opaque, we might make progress on this issue by continuing research into the relevant features of familiar and successful practices of certifying human experts.

This preliminary observation about the institutional or normative nature of expertise also reveals expertise’s twofold character: both social and personal. On the one hand, the title of ‘expert’ is eminently social insofar as it acts as a ‘badge’ (Martin, 1973, p. 159 – cited by Watson, 2021, p. 140) conferred on an individual – a badge which, moreover, enables them to simultaneously be endowed with another qualification: that of ‘credibility’ (Fricker, 1998; Rolin, 2002; Whyte & Crease, 2010). The concept of an expert’s ‘credibility’ has itself given rise to numerous epistemological discussions, particularly in the context of the study of the well documented phenomenon of ‘epistemic injustice’. As Miranda Fricker (1998, p. 168) notes, in these studies the notion of ‘credibility’ is presented as a ‘norm […] socially manifested in a particular historical and cultural setting’, such that it ‘guides practice so that rational authority is attributed to all and only those who possess the relevant working indicator properties’.

Expertise as a socially attributed badge of credibility thus appears to be distinct from a more fundamental dimension of expertise, namely its individual dimension. Indeed, expertise and credibility are not normally attributed to just anyone, and characteristics specific to the individual must be apparent prior to qualification. The badge or socially assigned label of expertise refers, to quote Kyle Powys Whyte and Robert Crease (2010, p. 413), to ‘indicators […] actually used by others as the basis for trusting scientists’. To be an expert, one must both act as such and be recognised as such, and this recognition involves, among other things, being able to show the world one’s skills.

Recognition of an individual’s expertise then presupposes that there are individuals who are indeed experts, and who demand to be recognised as such. Jamie Watson (2018, p. 41) thus distinguishes two dimensions of expertise: (1) the ‘objective’ dimension, also described as ‘truth-linked’, which refers to an individual’s (personal) status as an expert, whether or not publicly recognised, and (2) the ‘social’ dimension of expertise, which refers to the institutional recognition of the individual’s expertise (see also Majdik & Keith, 2011). It is at this point that matters about epistemic injustice can arise: if we realise, for instance, that credibility is attributed on a basis that we ultimately consider not to be qualifying or satisfactory for properly speaking of expertise. The concern, notoriously taken up and developed by Kristina Rolin (2002, p. 100), takes the form of a fear as to …

the possibility that there is a systematic mismatch between credibility and trustworthiness, so that the socially powerful is assigned credibility in spite of the lack of trustworthiness, or the powerless is denied credibility in spite of trustworthiness.

Rolin distinguishes credibility from another criterion that can also be used to circumscribe the extent of the trust to be placed in an individual, namely their ‘trustworthiness’. This latter concept – as we rapidly mentioned above – unlike the first, this time relates to the personal aspect of expertise – to what she describes as the expert’s ‘intellectual character’ (Rolin, 2002, p. 96). We will come back to this idea of ‘intellectual character’ in what follows, but for the moment let us simply note that this expression makes it possible to refer to indicators such as an expert’s ‘competence and sincerity’ (Whyte & Crease, 2010, p. 413) and thus aims to evaluate the moral character of the expert in an epistemic context (and it is also easy to understand that trustworthiness and credibility can sometimes suffer from an imbalance in their attributions – as we already under lined in the preceding section).

The important question for us now is to determine whether there are – or whether there could be – AI systems that possess the objective (or personal) dimension of expertise, without benefiting from its social dimension (i.e. without being recognised as such). I will suggest in what follows that only the social dimension of expertise can possibly be applied to artificial systems. Its objective, personal – or, one might say, authentic – dimension, on the other hand, cannot in my view be conferred on an AI system of any kind. We could indeed very well imagine people being trained to recognise certain characteristics that have been designated upstream as qualifying criteria for expertise in artificial systems. In this sense, the people in question could themselves become experts in identifying these characteristics. I contend that these characteristics, however, cannot be true criteria of an artificial system’s expertise, for they would necessarily be uncorrelated from an objective or personal dimension of expertise. The attribution of the badge of ‘expert’ to an AI system would then only concern the social dimension of expertise, without the presence of its objective (personal) dimension, which is nonetheless necessary in order to be able to fruitfully qualify an individual as an ‘expert’.

We would encounter in this type of case the useful distinction pro posed by Watson (2018) between expertise ‘in a subject matter’ and expertise ‘about a subject matter’. Our experts in the identification of artificial experts would be analogous to experts in parapsychology or phrenology: they would be experts about a subject matter (artificial expertise – or parapsychology, phrenology), in the sense that they would know perfectly well the characteristics, history or doctrines related to such a subject matter. However, they would not be experts in that subject matter (artificial expertise – or parapsychology, phrenology), insofar as their object of study does not actually exist. In the case of artificial expertise or in the case of parapsychology, the objects of inquiry in question do not exist insofar as they are conceptually incoherent. With regard to another object of study such as phrenology, it will be considered that it does not exist insofar as it has this time been refuted scientifically. Here, then, we are merely adapting and adopting a conclusion from Watson (2018, pp. 44–45) about parapsychology when we assert that there can be no expertise in artificial expertise: the subject of the expertise in question, in fact, turns out to be nonexistent. Or to borrow an expression from Neil Agnew et al. (1997, p. 236), it could be said that this kind of expertise falls under the heading of non‘reality-relevance’.

Let us now try to outline the con tours of expertise in more detail, in order to understand the extent to which an artificial system cannot claim this status (in its objective dimension – and thus should not be granted it in its subjective one either). This will allow us to understand more clearly why the analogy between the trust placed in such a system and the trust placed in human experts is unsatisfactory.

3.3 A veritistic conception of expertise

A first point to note concerning our conception of expertise and the possibility of its attribution to an artificial system is that we frequently consider it from an approach that can easily be described, following Alvin Goldman (1991, 2001, 2018) as ‘veritistic’ or ‘truth-linked’.

Indeed, some thing that still today regularly stands out in the literature on expertise (and that is still of importance when it comes to discus sing the expertise of AI systems) is the insistence, in some of the definitions, on the relationship between the agent described as an ‘expert’ and – on the one hand – some knowledge they have acquired in a domain (sometimes simply and notoriously characterised, since Plato’s Theaetetus, as a set of ‘true and justified beliefs’ – Goldman, 2001; Pritchard, 2018; Hetherington, 2019), and – on the other hand – the agent’s capacity to acquire or produce new knowledge in this same domain (Goldman, 2001; Watson, 2018). Goldman (2001, p. 92) defines the expert in a particular field as …

(…) someone who possesses an extensive fund of knowledge (true belief) and a set of skills or methods for apt and successful deployment of this knowledge to new questions in the domain.

According to this conception of expertise – which is only broadly outlined here –, the expert is someone who, for a given field or subject, finds themselves in a particular epistemic position – i.e. one that dominates – in relation to the vast majority of other epistemic agents. The expert is thus characterised by this dual relationship with a field of knowledge, on the one hand, and an epistemic society on the other hand: experts are those who are particularly well informed on a given subject (Coady, 2012; Goldman, 2001, 2018; Scholz, 2009) and who play a very specific practical social role, namely that of epistemic resource for other individuals (Coady, 2012; Goldman, 2018; Croce, 2019).

It is then understandable that the trust placed in the expert in this veritistic conception may be based on what Jennifer Lackey (2018) describes as a ‘Track Record Argument’, which consists in acknowledging the visible superiority of one individual over others in terms of their ability to reach the truth on a given subject. If a person repeatedly proves to be a reliable source of knowledge in a field, then the non specialist seems a priori justified in defer ring to their judgement – and this conception of expertise is then said to be ‘reliabilist’ (Sosa, 1991, 2017; Zagzebski, 1996).

As a first step, then, we can content ourselves with noting here that the criterion of truth in the enterprise of recognising the expert to whom one is rationally justified in defer ring can certainly constitute an ingredient in the temptation to think of DL-based systems on the model of human experts. We have already had the occasion to note in the foregoing that the artificial systems in question do indeed make it possible to obtain results that are generally of a high quality, correctness, or reliability – and that are moreover sometimes more accurate than the results produced by human experts. The reliability (the good track record) of these systems therefore makes them, it would seem, entirely honourable candidates to play the role just mentioned of epistemic resource for human agents (and in fact, current AI systems are regularly referred to as ‘epistemic technologies’ (Alvarado, 2023). Alvarado’s interesting characterisation mobilised here actually implies an epistemic gradation of artefacts. At the bottom of the scale are non epistemic artefacts that can nevertheless have an epistemic use (such as a mechanical shovel). A little higher up the scale are epistemic amplifier artefacts such as a calculator or a microscope. We can suggest that the expert systems of the first wave of AI have their place at this level of the epistemic scale. The functioning of expert systems is indeed solely based on a form of ‘mere computation, calculation and memory retrieval’ (p. 8), in contrast to which Alvarado defines the truly epistemic nature of the most recent AI systems. Deep learning-based AI technologies thus occupy the highest place on the epistemic ladder, as they are in fact ‘paradigmatic ally and exclusively an epistemic technology’ (2023, p. 9 – an observation that is also echoed by Ferrario et al., 2024). The crucial difference would lie in particular in the observation that artefacts (such as micro scopes), although they are generally used and ‘deployed in an epistemic context, do not deal with epistemic content and do not perform epistemic operations on that content’ (Alvarado, 2023, p. 7)17.

Taken in a sense that could probably be described as ‘functionalist’ (Croce, 2019), such a veritistic conception of expertise does not in fact seem to reserve the category of candidates for the title of ‘expert’ to human beings. An expert would be anyone or any thing that could reliably enable the attainment of truth or the acquisition of knowledge for other individuals. It seems that a conceptual background of this kind regarding the nature of expertise can be found in some of the statements made today in the literature on AI systems used in decision making. For example, Jens Christian Bjerring and Jacob Busch (2020, p. 3) state that …

insofar as AI systems will eventually outperform the best practitioners in specific medical domains, practitioners will have epistemic obligation to rely on these systems in medical decision making. After all, if a practitioner knows of an epistemic source that is both more knowledgeable, more accurate, and more reliable in decision making, she should treat it as an expert and align her verdicts with those of the source.

Thomas Grote and Philipp Berens (2020), in the same vein (and thus adopting a veritistic conception of expertise), go so far as to suggest that DL-based diagnostic systems used in a medical context can be conceived of as ‘experts’ in the same way as human experts – experts with whom it would also be possible to have epistemic disagreements. The two authors thus evaluate in their paper a ‘potential case of peer disagreement between a clinician and a machine learning algorithm’. It is worth mentioning the definition given by these two authors of an epistemic disagreement between peers:

‘peer disagreement’ describes cases of two (equally) competent peers with respect to a certain domain related activity, whereby both parties disagree with respect to a certain proposition.

The purely veritistic and functionalist conception of expertise, thus, does not seem to exclude the possibility for artefacts to act as epistemic experts and hence epistemic peers, insofar as they provide broadly correct results. In what follows, in contrast, I shall try to show why this conception of expertise is reductive and that the idea put forward by Grote and Berens – for instance – of an artificial system as an expert and an epistemic peer, must face some vexing objections.

4 Artificial experts versus human experts

4.1 Expertise, comprehension and justification

The veritistic conception, although it helps bringing to light some of the necessary characteristics of expertise, suffers from a number of limitations. In addition to an individual’s consistency in reaching the truth and producing knowledge, other characteristics or qualities are in fact frequently put forward and presented as potentially influencing positively or negatively the trust that people are prepared to place in the person they designate as an expert. A first limitation of the veritistic conception concerns the close relationship between knowledge on the one hand, and understanding on the other.

The trust we are prepared to place in an expert is not solely based on the expert’s track record. So-called ‘reliabilist’ epistemology, since Goldman (1979), insists on the fact that the acquisition of knowledge must be ‘non accidental’ and must involve a process or method that is accordingly ‘reliable’ – the reliability of a procedure being defined here as ‘the tendency of a process to produce beliefs that are true rather than false’ (Goldman, 1979, p. 95).

A first instance of breakdown in the attribution of the character of ‘expert’ to an individual who nevertheless makes correct judgements on a specific subject may thus take the form of a case where the individual in question expresses themselves or takes a position on a subject about which they actually know and understand nothing.

Someone who memorises facts on a particular subject (for example) without trying to understand what they are about, although they may be able to provide correct answers to a number of questions about it, will not be considered an expert on the subject (Scholz, 2009; Croce, 2019; Baghramian & Croce, 2024). This kind of argument is, of course, very regularly and precisely mobilised in the context of AI – at least since Searle’s famous paper (Searle, 1980). Thus, a person who makes correct judgements using a ‘Chinese room’ type of method or contraption cannot be considered an expert on the subject on which they are expressing an opinion (and giving correct answers). We are therefore facing a dimension of expertise that seems to go beyond the simple retention of information: here, knowledge is concomitant with a form of understanding. It is obviously quite common to distinguish between the person who speaks about some thing they understand, and the person who merely behaves like a parrot (Locke, 1690; Wittgenstein, 1967a), and the criticism is itself regularly advanced in the context of assessing the capabilities of AI systems (e.g., Bender et al., 2021; Boisseau, 2024a). In this sense, a machine could not be considered an expert on any subject whatsoever insofar as it is not actually capable of understanding any thing. If the use of a machine can be a reliable method for an individual to acquire knowledge, it is the individual who can be qualified as an expert because it is them (and not the machine) who understands the results obtained (with the machine).

It could be argued here that this whole conception of expertise (which requires a capacity for understanding on the part of the person who is to be called an ‘expert’) is overly anthropocentric. Indeed, it is fully anthropocentric or humancentred. I do not believe that we have to worry too much about the idea that the concept of ‘expert’ is anthropocentric. It is, of course, a concept that finds its primary application in the context of a human life. It is used by human beings to describe (primarily) certain human beings with certain particular qualities or abilities. Possessing the appropriate qualities and abilities is precisely what it means to be an ‘expert’. If the word is used to describe a human reality, then of course the qualities and abilities concerned will be human-centred. The matter here is indeed to be clear with what we mean when we use the term ‘expert’. There is from my point of view no problem in recognising that the concept of an ‘expert’ is thus ordinarily (paradigmatic ally, primarily) applied to human beings. The pressing matter, then, is rather whether such a human-centred concept can subsist when some of its fundamental criteria of application (such as the intellectual and epistemic qualities and capacities of a human being) are removed from the picture (as it is the case when the concept is applied to AI systems). Here, I argue that it cannot: these rather ‘human’ characteristics (among which we find the capacity for understanding) are crucial for being able to speak of ‘expertise’, if we wish to retain the ordinary meaning of the term ‘expert’.

Other positions found in the recent literature on epistemic AI can be mentioned here. Going in a quite different direction, Freiman (2024a), for his part, suggests that it can be illuminating to speak of ‘AI testimony’ as a special species of testimony which would lack most of the usual human characteristics associated with testimony,

but which is nonetheless phenomenologically similar to a testimony from the point of view of the human receiver, and which can also be epistemic ally relevant. Of course, it is debatable to speak of the pro positional outputs of AI systems as a species of testimony if this type of testimony is precisely devoid of all the necessary properties of testimony. Since I do not wish to deny the possibility that a human being can acquire knowledge through an artificial system (that would indeed be going too far), let me simply say that Freiman’s notion of ‘AI testimony’ or of ‘technology-based beliefs’ (Freiman, 2024b), as well as Alvarado’s (2023) aforementioned concept of ‘epistemic technology’ can certainly all prove useful for theorising anew about the way human beings acquire knowledge through AI.

For our purposes, however, we do not need to go farther than merely acknowledging the existence of such attempts at theorising about the epistemic use of AI. My point for now is indeed limited to rejecting the – in my sense, highly problematic – trend of describing some artificial systems as ‘experts’ in the same sense that we would normally describe epistemic ally competent human beings as ‘experts’. I do not mean to advance any thing precise (and positive) for the moment as to how one could otherwise describe the systems in question (an attitude which in fact seems to overlap to some extent with Freiman’s ambition when he theorises the concept of AI testimony – see Freiman, 2024a, p. 17). My point, as of now, is therefore strictly negative. My position is that expertise is more than just the ability to obtain a correct result;

it also involves having arrived at that result intelligently, i.e. with a certain knowledge and understanding of the subject and the task at hand, how it fits into a wider context, etc. (Majdik & Keith, 2011; Watson, 2018). The addition of the criterion of comprehension thus leads us to adopt what Watson (2018, p. 46) characterises as a form of ‘epistemic facility account’ of expertise – which he presents as follows:

(EF) A subject, S, is an expert in a subject matter, M, if and only if S (a) understands a substantial proportion of the terms, propositions, and arguments in M, along with the procedures used to formulate propositions in M, and (b) S has the ability to demonstrate (a) successfully in the discharge of her epistemic activities.

A second necessary condition for the attribution of the qualifier ‘expert’ to an individual (which also goes beyond the simple veritistic approach to expertise and is not attributable to a machine) is apparent in Watson’s quote and is presented as the other side of understanding, namely: the possibility of giving reasons in support of one’s judgement. This is where we find a second possible point of breakdown in the attribution of expertise to an individual: a person who professes judgements that are systematically identical to those of a real expert but who – unlike the latter – never has the slightest explanation or justification to give in support of them, would not be considered an expert at all.

We have, of course, pointed out in the foregoing that there is sometimes a form of opacity with regard to the ability of experts to justify their judgements or decisions (and that it is precisely on this point that the comparison of the AI system with the human expert is based). However, this analogy is unsatisfactory insofar as the opacity of the expert’s reasoning is in no way equivalent to the opacity of algorithmic processes, for the following reason: opacity in a human context is only partial and contingent, whereas it is, on the contrary, complete and necessary in the case of artificial systems. Indeed, it should be noted that although the practice of an expert sometimes seems indescribable using explicit rules, and although their judgement may sometimes appear to be ‘artistic’ (Shortliffe & Buchanan, 1975, p. 352) or vague, this initial observation should not lead us to conclude that the expert is positioned outside the normative field of reasons. It is perfectly conceivable that an expert might not know, on a particular occasion, how to justify their judgement, or that they might not be able, on a particular occasion, to explain their action. On the other hand, it is inconceivable that they could never do so.

How, then, can we explain this inability to give reasons for one’s actions? One concept that might help us is the Aristotelian notion of phronesis. Sometimes translated as ‘prudence’ or ‘practical wisdom’, this notion of phronesis allows us to insist on the fact that the art of good judgement does not rest solely on the scrupulous application of a certain number of rules or a precise method or chain of operations. On the contrary, good judgement sometimes rests on a foundation that could be considered experiential, linked – therefore – to a form of familiarity or habit with a subject matter. Zoltan Madjik and William Keith (Majdik & Keith, 2011, p. 281), thus characterise Aristotelian phronesis as an ability not to ‘deduce the right thing to do’, but to ‘see it’ (see also Ground, 2024). The expert’s capacity for judgement therefore contains a strong instinctive dimension – although, it must be stressed, there is nothing innate about it insofar as it is the outcome of a long process of training and habituation as to how to proceed when faced with a certain object of study (how to observe it, how to judge it, etc.). The expert is the one who ‘develop[s] a feeling for the rules’, without, however, limiting themselves to a scrupulous application of these rules. The good judge is then the one whose judgements are appropriate or adequate for a given situation, in relation to past situations and norms specific to the field in question.

Although it is not always obvious for an expert who ‘sees’ rather than ‘deduces’ what is ‘the right thing to do’ to justify their action or decision, the fact remains that expertise requires that the actions carried out by the expert be intelligible in relation to the domain in which they are situated and the context in which they are carried out (here I disagree with Ground, 2024 but agree with Majdik & Keith, 2011). This means that the expert must be able to satisfy what Majdik & Keith – who also draw on Wittgenstein – call the ‘counterfactual condition’ of expertise:

This counterfactual asks whether the practice could be judged as intelligible in the context of a given situation—could be ‘tested for correctness’ (Wittgenstein, 1953, § ) outside someone’s subjective imagination and experience—if the practice was integrated into a public vocabulary and grammar.

The criterion of the possibility of the expert providing an intelligible justification for their action thus poses a major problem for the analogy between the opacity of the output of AI systems and the opacity of the decisions of human experts: there is no question of an AI system understanding the subject for which it is mobilised, on the one hand, and explaining or justifying its output by appealing to reasons, on the other.

4.2 Causes and reasons
 
It should also be noted that the opacity of the reasons behind the actions of experts is often presented as being directly linked to another form of opacity (also mentioned above), namely the opacity of brain operations (what we previously dubbed the intrinsic opacity of cognitive systems for anyone). This opacity of cerebral operations is itself – as we have seen – the subject of an analogy with the opacity of the operations of the artificial neural network operating in an AI system.

The opacity of AI systems is of course the recurring object of scrutiny of the whole movement labelled XAI. In a recent paper (and drawing on Andrada et al., 2023), Heersmink et al. (2024) thus speak of a goal of ‘reflective transparency’ of the workings of AI systems. The authors explain that a system is reflectively transparent when ‘we can see into the inner workings of the computational system, in which case we understand why it does what it does’ (p. 5). The pressing matter here is, of course, to determine what sense of ‘why’ is mobilised in discussions on AI opacity (or its converse: transparency). Is it a causal sense of ‘why’ or a normative one? In a following footnote, the authors admit that ‘To be fair, when inter acting with other humans we don’t know precisely what goes on in their brains. Human cognitive processes underlying speech can be opaque too’ (ibid.). This remark is obviously in keeping with the trend in the literature identified and dis cussed here, which attempts to compare the opacity of AI systems with the opacity of human experts. According to this footnote, we can hypothesise that what Heersmink et al. specifically have in mind is the causal sense of ‘why’ the computational system does what it does. There is indeed a great temptation to equate these two types of opacity: the opacity concerning the reasoning followed by the human expert (manifested by their inability to explain their decision) would be directly correlated with the opacity concerning the unintelligibility of the neuronal processes in their brain. This assimilation of the two opacities would suggest that the explanation that the expert is unable to provide us could be found in their brain, if only we were able to decipher its workings. In the same way, we can imagine that the AI system could very well have reasons for pro posing the output it has dis played, but that these reasons are inaccessible to us because they lie at the level of the operations of its artificial neural network (this obstacle is sometimes presented today as having been overcome by the so-called ‘chain of thought’ prompting technique).

In my view, this assimilation – and the analogy that follows from it (i.e. the analogy between the opacity of the brain and the opacity of the algorithm) – is based on a confusion as to the nature of reasons on the one hand, and causes on the other. The distinction between reasons and causes sometimes goes unnoticed insofar as the two concepts are mobilised to deal with questions of the same kind, i.e. questions that are generally answered by the same conjunctive locution ‘because’. However, the difference between reasons and causes is of prime importance. As Jonathan Lowe noted (2009, p. 349), the ‘seemingly small step’ of turning the reasons for a person’s action or decision into the causes of their action or decision is in reality ‘an erroneous [step] of enormous magnitude’. In doing so, we in fact ignore the distinction between the normative field proper to reasons and the mechanical field proper to causes. Let us clarify (of course we are coming up on some grandiose battle fields, and I can only be brief here).

We ask why a person raised their arm (to use a paradigmatic example dis cussed at length in the philosophy of action since Wittgenstein, and we reply by explaining that they raised it because (say) they aimed at signal ling to the taxi that they wanted to use their service. Our explanation mobilises the individual’s reason for raising their arm. As Peter Hacker (2007, p. 199) reminds us, a reason consists of an ‘explanatory or justificatory step in actual or warranted (or purportedly warranted) reasoning’. Asking for a reason for the action of Ving therefore does not consist in ‘describing or explaining what caused one to V, but what one’s rationale for Ving was’ (Hacker, 2007 p. 226). On the other hand, we can also ask how or why the person raises their arm – not in the sense this time of the person’s reason for carrying out this action (rather than another or none), but in the sense of the physical condition of possibility for them to carry out this movement. We can therefore take the approach of explaining that they raised their arm (or that they were able to raise their arm) because such and such clusters of neurons were activated in their brain. But here we have two uses of the locution because, and two modes of explanation and description of one and the same action. Unlike the first use of because, which explains the action in terms of the agent’s reasons and which is a normative use, this second use does not explain the action of raising the arm as such, but rather explains the movement of the arm. This explanation is no longer made in normative terms (in terms of reasons for the agent to act as they do) but in physical or causal terms: we are now asking about the conditions of possibility (physical or neurophysical) for the agent to be able to move in a certain way. We are, therefore, dealing here with a cause, insofar as we are faced with an explanation that presents – and here we are following a diagnosis by Anthony Kenny (1978, p. 22) – a ‘sufficient antecedent condition’, that is …

a state or event preceding in time the event to be explained, such that it is a sufficient condition for the occurrence of such an event. This means that there is a covering law to the effect that whenever such a causal condition obtains, it is followed by an event of the appropriate kind.

Moreover, as we can see, the field of causes and that of reasons in the context of explaining or describing an action are not interchangeable – as can be appreciated by this instructive example (somewhat similar to the previous one) pro posed by Hacker (2009, p. 89) in which he distinguishes between the explanation of the chess player’s gesture of performing a move in neural terms on the one hand, and in normative terms on the other:

Neural events in the brain may explain how it is that the chess player is able to move his hand. If they did not occur as normal, he would not be able to move or control the movements of his hand. But neural events cannot explain his move – only those principles of chess strategy that he was aware of can do that. Nor can they warrant the redescription of his action in terms of its normative consequences, for example, that he checked his opponent.

For our purposes, these cursory reflections on the distinction between reasons and causes lead us to the following realisation: while it can certainly be useful, in the case of machine learning systems, to determine the causes that led a program to produce a particular output (and the explanation of the causal mechanisms at play can then, for instance, take the form of an analysis of the weights assigned to the various connections between the artificial neurons of each layer), in the case of human decisions or judgements, on the other hand, it is not by mobilising a cause that we will be able to explain why a particular decision or judgement was put forward. The sense of ‘why’ and the sense of ‘explain’ that we are interested in when we ask a person to justify their action, is in fact a normative sense and no longer simply a causal one.

A major difference between the two usages is, of course, that in the normative usage of the locution ‘because’ and in the explanation of actions by mobilising reasons, there is a place (nonexistent in the context of explanation by reference to causes) for the interplay between the correct and the incorrect, between mistakes and successes. As David Cock burn (2001, pp. 8–9) points out by comparing the idea of a person’s responsibility for their action with that of a volcano’s responsibility for its eruption, the ability to give reasons goes hand in hand with a certain idea of responsibility. Because the volcano had no say in its eruption, it cannot be considered responsible for it (and consequently cannot be said to have been more or less successful at it). If we wish to see the comparison between the functioning of brains and the functioning of algorithms as fruitful, we must therefore consider that it is only fruitful in a negative manner, insofar as it allows us to insist on the fact that the description of cerebral processes, like that of algorithmic processes, cannot inform us in any way about the reasons which led the observed agent to carry out a particular action.

We can thus see why there is a problem in thinking that the same type of explanation should be used for human decisions and machine outputs. The confusion at stake rests on a fraudulent assimilation of causes with reasons in the context of the explanation of actions: where human actions and decisions do require to be explained by reasons, the outputs of AI systems can only be explained by causes (or metonymically by the reasons of their designers and/or users).

4.4 The expert’s intellectual character

As Hacker (2009, p. 91) points out, the distinctive nature of the description or explanation of the actions of human agents using reasons allows us to ‘understand the agent’s behaviour idiographic ally rather than nomothetic ally’ and thus to be able to ‘judge the agent and evaluate what he did, but also to judge his character’. This brings us back to the notion of ‘character’ mentioned earlier. This concept is very often put forward in social epistemology to question the nature of expertise – and it should be noted in particular that one form taken by reliabilist epistemology is that of a ‘virtue reliabilism’. Virtue epistemology emphasises the possession and exercise by an agent of particular skills or ‘epistemic virtues’ (Sosa, 1991; Zagzebski, 1996; Greco, 1999). Described as ‘stable dispositions’ (Greco, 1999, p. 287), these virtues which are necessary for the acquisition of knowledge and for the deployment of expertise are frequently grouped together under the more general label of ‘intellectual character’, or ‘epistemic character’ of an epistemic agent. Hardwig (1991, p. 700) puts it this way:

A’s reliance on B’s testimony must include reliance on B. The reliability of A’s belief depends on the reliability of B’s character. B’s truthfulness is part of her moral character. Competence, conscientious work, and epistemic self assessment are aspects of B’s ‘epistemic character.’ I shall return to this point frequently, and ‘character’ will refer to these moral and epistemic qualities. (Although competence is not a character trait per se, it standardly depends on character: becoming knowledgeable and then remaining current almost always requires habits of self-discipline, focus, and persistence.)

We can thus understand that the expert in whom we place our trust is expected not only to have a good track record – and therefore to be reliable – in matters of truth or the acquisition of knowledge, but also to have formed their beliefs in a good way. Experts are also expected to be reliable insofar as they make judicious use of their cognitive and sensory faculties, and to display certain epistemic virtues: we expect them to be conscientious, attentive, non biased, honest, intellectually courageous, and so on – and here we come back to the objective or personal aspect of expertise, already dis cussed above.

Moreover, this expectation with regard to the virtuous character of the expert is directly in line with what we have just noted: the status of expert is not simply a ‘given’, it is not an innate property or a mere decreed social attribution. On the contrary, it is first and foremost some thing that is acquired, developed and worked on at an individual level. Every thing we have mentioned above can be brought under the more general heading of ‘intellectual character’. The honesty of the individual who claims the status of expert in terms of their understanding of an object of study, the requirement for a non superficial knowledge of the more general field within which their research falls, the ability to justify their decisions, actions or diagnoses using relevant reasons, and now their various specific moral and intellectual qualities make up what can be described as the ethos of the expert, i.e. their intellectual character.

Crucially – and we have already caught a glimpse of this in connection with the distinction between causes and reasons – expertise implies a form of competence on the part of the expert, and thus leaves room for play or variation: one can be a more or less good expert, and one can also improve or, on the contrary, lose some of one’s qualities. The following remark by Lowe (2009, p. 353) about the relation of causal mechanisms to the rationality or reasonableness of an agent can thus be extended or adapted to the question of virtue that concerns us at present:

[…] there can be no correct account of rational action in such causal terms, because an action’s being caused by the agent’s beliefs and desires is incompatible with its being an action that the agent chose to perform in the light of those beliefs and desires – and no action is rational if the agent does not freely choose to perform it. An action can be in accordance with reason, or reasonable, without being rational. To be rational, it must be done for a reason which the agent freely chooses to act upon – or so I claim.

To carry on with the example of the volcanic eruption mentioned earlier, it is easy to concede that there is no point in describing the eruption of a volcano as being more or less prudent, more or less courageous, more or less skillful, and so on. The eruption of a volcano can be assessed neither rationally (as we suggested in the previous section) nor morally. A volcanic eruption is neither rational nor moral, and neither is the action of an AI system based on deep learning. On the other hand, it should be noted that the output of an AI system can of course be judged to be rational or moral (or irrational or immoral) in a derivative way, e.g. in the sense that it would go in accordance with (or against) some of our values. A program that contains a racist bias is not racist in the intentional sense of the term (or only metonymically, i.e. as an indirect way to characterise the racism of the people that created it, or that use it).

As Lowe writes, the outcome of a causal action (as is – for our purposes – the output of an algorithm) can certainly be described as being ‘in accordance with reason’ – or in accordance with what is moral – insofar as it may appear rational or moral to us, without having been carried out by the causal agent (i.e. the machine) rationally or virtuously. In the same way (and to adapt an example from Putnam, 1981), we will not judge the ant to be immoral because its path on the earthy ground takes the form, in our eyes, of an obscene sign; just as we will not judge several ants to be irrational if the combination of their paths on the ground takes the form of an inscription that can be read as: ‘2 + 2 = 7’. One distinction to bear in mind, however, is that while our artificial systems may not act rationally or morally on their own, they are nevertheless designed to act in accordance with a certain conception of rationality and morality. They can therefore in a sense, again perhaps metonymic or derivative (but by no means literal), be regarded as acting virtuously or rationally, insofar as we do in fact act in this way when we use them.

It is in this sense of a derived attribution of rationality or virtue that the so-called ‘machine ethics’ or ‘machine morality’ project is being put forward today (Allen et al., 2005; Allen & Wallach, 2009; Walsh, 2022). The project of creating machines that are readily described as ‘moral’ or ‘virtuous’ in reality appears to be that of trying ‘to ensure that the systems [we] build are beneficial to humanity and don’t cause harm to people’ (Allen & Wallach, 2009, p. 4). The frequently put forward concept of ‘AMA’ for ‘artificial moral agent’ therefore refers to systems that are sufficiently powerful to be put into situations in which they may have to make decisions (in a derivative way) that can have moral consequences (and the systems we are here more particularly interested in can of course fall into this class of artificial moral agents). The question generally asked is that of determining how to ensure that AMAs are endowed with a form of ‘ethical knowledge’, an expression which does not, however, refer to the epistemic or intellectual virtues which interest us here, but rather to lines of conduct that can be followed by the machines so that their actions are found to be de facto in line with moral values that we will have previously designated as being good ones.

4.5 Epistemic peers and disagreement

These remarks about machines’ lack of intellectual character allow us to return to the questions raised earlier: can artificial systems be experts in the same way that human beings can? As far as the layperson is concerned, should the relationship of trust with these systems be modelled on the relationship of trust with experts? Finally, should the relationship between a human expert and an artificial system be seen as a relationship between epistemic peers?

Understandably, the answer we give to these questions is the same every time, namely a negative one. Since an AI system does not have any of the qualities necessary for expertise, it cannot claim to be an expert. The conceptualisation of the relationship of trust between humans (lay people or specialists) and artificial systems on the model of the relationship between lay people and experts (or between experts visàvis each other) poses a twofold risk: on the one hand, of course, there is the risk of placing too much trust in these systems, which could lead to false results being accepted as true, or bad solutions being accepted as good ones. Allen and Wallach (2009) refer to this first risk when they express the fear – rightly and increasingly dis cussed today in the context of generative AI (see also Friedman & Kahn, 1992; and more recently; Lee et al., 2025) – of a loss of capacity on the part of the people who rely excessively on these systems. These are in turn described as ‘crutches’ substituting ‘for [people’s] own critical thinking’.

The risk of thinking of artificial systems on the model of human experts (particularly in terms of the trust we place in them) can also take the form of absolving the human agents who use them of their responsibility. Recall here the position defended by authors such as Grote and Berens (2020). They suggest that an artificial decision making system is an expert in the same sense as a doctor is an expert. Given that the machine is considered in this way, it is conceivable that it would make sense to speak of an epistemic disagreement between epistemic peers in the event of a discrepancy between the output of a machine and the judgement of a human. For our part, we have suggested here that it would make no sense to speak in these contexts of disagreement between humans and machines.

The reason for this lies in the fact that expertise, as we have now understood it, implies a form of competence on the part of the expert, and at the same time implies that the latter can answer for their actions and are therefore responsible for them. David Christensen (2007), in this vein, suggests that one of the preconditions for qualifying an individual as an ‘epistemic peer’ is the fact that we have been able to discuss matters with them many times and have had the opportunity to assess both their epistemic reliability and the state of their knowledge, as well as their intellectual virtues and possible biases. Drawing on McGrath (2008), Lackey (2018, p. 229) further suggests that an ‘epistemic peer relative to a question is someone whom [one] regard[s] as equally likely to be mistaken about this question’ (emphasis added). Therein lies an important point: if an AI system cannot either do well or do badly – as we have suggested in the foregoing – neither can it make a blunder, an error or a mistake (although there may nonetheless be errors in its outputs). This point echoes that of Ryan (2020), who emphasises the distinction between simply being disappointed in a person or artefact whose actions do not meet our expectations, and feeling betrayed by a person who breaks the trust placed in them. It is clear that the form of trust placed in technological artefacts (a form of reliance), when some thing goes wrong with the artefact, can only lead to disappointment for the agent who relied on it, and never to a feeling of betrayal (no one feels betrayed by a vacuum cleaner when it breaks down and can no longer do what it was designed to do).

Considering a decision support system as an expert can lead human experts to grant too great a form of agency to the machine, insofar as the latter is in no way competent in the sense that interests us when we speak of expertise – i.e. a sense that goes beyond the simple veritistic framework. So while we can certainly be incredulous about the result obtained by means of a machine, and while we can certainly characterise it as correct or incorrect and use it to revise our own estimates, etc., on the other hand we can in no way disagree with it (or, once again, only metaphorically or metonymically).

The conclusion I have now reached is also in line with a range of positions currently being developed by a number of philosophers interested in these issues, and particularly in the question of trust. For example, Ryan (2020) warns against treating an AI system somewhat as an epistemic peer (by trusting it rather than simply relying on it). He writes that ‘Ultimately, AI should not be viewed as trustworthy because it undermines the value of interpersonal trust, anthropomorphises AI (the affective account of trust), and diverts responsibility from those developing and using AI (the normative account of trust)’ (p. 2). This point actually echoes that of Joanna Bryson (2018a), who clearly states that ‘Trust is a relationship between peers’, and adds that ‘Only other software development techniques can be peers with AI’. In another paper (Bryson, 2018b, p. 21) and in this same vein, she writes that ‘Assigning responsibility to the artefact for actions we designed it to execute would be to deliberately disavow our responsibility for that design’.

Although it is not the subject of this paper, this latter matter is a pressing one. Having argued, as I have done here, that an artificial system cannot be an expert in the same sense that a human being is an expert (and therefore cannot be an epistemic peer to a human expert), one question still remains unanswered: who should be responsible for AI systems’ outputs? This issue is obviously very complex and requires first of all the identification of who could even be considered a candidate for this role. How to even identify such candidates is by no means obvious.

The present paper aimed solely at questionning the assumption regularly found in a subset of the literature on AI epistemology that AI systems should (or even could) be considered analogous to human experts, given that we (as nonexperts) supposedly find ourselves in the same opaque position when it comes to evaluating both of their results. It would go beyond the scope of my remarks to develop a theoretical framework for the kind of trust that should legitimately be placed in artificial systems, or to fully explore the question of responsibility for an outcome for which a machine is involved. I simply wanted to establish that one particular strand of thinking in the literature on the subject (that draws a parallel between the opacity of AI systems and the opacity of human experts) is misguided.

5 Conclusion
My aim in this paper was to assess how far the analogy holds between the trust a layperson places in an expert and the trust – whether from a layperson or an expert – that a human being places in a deep learning-based artificial system. I began by examining the main elements of the analogy, showing that they rest on the observation that several varieties of opacity are thought to arise in comparable ways in both human experts and AI systems. Given that the opacity of a human expert’s actions, decisions, and judgements usually does not prevent lay people from trusting them, this opacity is sometimes invoked to justify placing a similar level of trust in AI systems. In these contexts, the opacity of deep learning programs is no longer presented as an obstacle to the acquisition of knowledge and to the trust that we are justified in placing in AI, but as a criterion of its expertise. I then uncovered that in these discussions, expertise appears to be a purely veritistic concept. Subsequently, I attempted to show how the veritistic conception of expertise is inadequate, and how other factors need to be taken into account before a person can be considered an expert. These characteristics, I have argued, cannot be possessed by machines (no matter how much they mobilise in capital, GPUs, or hope).
